Communication protocols and sensors:-
Communication protocols are basically the rules of communication between two electronic devices.It's just like how two robots or two computers trying to establish
connections with each other like how to talk,when to talk and what languages to use to interact with each other.
Sensors are electronic devices that try to detect changes in the physical world and convert them into digital signals that systems can understand.

IMU:-
It stands for Inertial Measurement Unit.It measures angular rate,force and sometimes magnetic field.IMU contains some devices which have measuring tools which
perform specific tasks for example 3-axis gyroscope + accelerometer would make 6-axis IMU and 9-axis IMU consist of accelorometer, gyroscope and magnetometer.
Accelerometer measures change of velocity of a moving object due to linear f
orces which are acting on the body  and they are commonly used, due to force of gravity 
speeding up or slowing down we can combine a vehicle’s acceleration to calculate velocity and then distance travelled. Accelerometer data alone does not account for 
turns and non linear movement that is why it also contains a Gyroscope.
Gyroscope which measures angular velocity of three axes,roll about y-axis, pitch about x-axis and rate of rotation about z-axis,they don’t have any initial frame of
reference like accelerometer using both their datas, a sensor fusion basically techniques a vehicles position and orientation which can be easily calculated.Their 
data can also be used in GNSS based navigation system (it is basically a satellite based system that provides positioning,navigation and timing services to users on 
the planet and near the earth’s surfaces as well) to allow us for the use of precise tracking systems and detailed motion data to be gathered about a vehicle and then 
motion data can be combined with sensors such as speed or reverse gear signals for collision and detection analysis.
Another key use of IMU is dead reckoning (it is a navigation technique that estimates an object’s current position based on it’s previous known position,direction and
speed as well)
IMU chips also uses gnss data  as a reference point and thus it gathers information about vehicle’s movement and use calculations to determine an exact route before 
gnss signal is restored(gnss only reach metre accuracy whereas imu is important for sharing the most accurate data).


GPS:-
GPS is a satellite-based navigation system that provides location and time information anywhere on Earth. It stands for Global Positioning System. It basically uses
a network of satellites that transmit signals to the GPS receivers, which further calculate their position based on the distance from the satellite. 
How do GPS receivers communicate? i
.Several languages or protocols including standard and non-standard message formats 
ii.Information stored as binary data transmitted as binary or Several standard formats
NEMA-0183 is a way of transmitting the information through GPS. These type of transmissions basically use ASCII as a way to transmit the that data.
NEMA 0183 was founded in 1957 by Electronic Dealers at New York Boardshow to strengthen the relationship with other companies. Protocol was later on adopted in 1983 
for interfacing marine electronics but has also expanded for terrestrial electronics. It is ASCII based. It uses 8 bits of data.
The data is transmitted in ASCII strings or sentences. Sentences begin with a dollar sign and end with a carriage return line feed <CR>< LF>
It always kind of end up with this asterisk and then two hexadecimal values which acts as a checksum. A checksum basically allows us to determine that this entire 
stream will be essentially transmitted correctly I think the character in that calls are set to be incorrect. So this checks on the way for us to check on that. 
There is a maximum value of 80 characters, and it's 80 characters plus those two additional characters of the return line. There is a limitation on the amount of 
data we can transmit in a single string. 
There are 3 types of sentences.
1. Talker sentences:-It's the most common type and it divides the address up into two characters and three characters, with the first two characters being the talker
and the last three characters being the actual sentence of that character ,the sentence identifier will be dependent on the talker. 
For example $GPGLL,3607.48,N,09704.43,W*7A 
N for  north and W for  west, there's probably a latitude and longitude and that's what the GPGLL string works. GP stands for GPS at the talker, so any time we see 
GP, that means a GPS unit is talking. And GLL is basically a unit that basically is talking about geographic position lat/long. So this one here is just delivering 
lat/long values if we see this string. 
2.Proprietary sentences:-These always come with a capital P character right after the dollar sign.These have a particular manufacturer ID that take up the next three
characters, and that fifth character in the address is a letter code for that particular manufacturer. So they have A through Z, 26 particular characters there. They
can define whatever sentence they want to define. And then they have however many data fields they want to have, as long as they don't exceed the 80-character limit.
And then, again, the whole checksum and carriage return line feed. For example, $PLEIS, AHT,0, 1.90,0*34<CR><FL>
LEIS, which stands for Leica Systems, which is a manufacturer of surveying equipment. AT is the antenna height, and this is basically a sentence that's telling us 
where 1.9 meters is the height of the antenna for this particular unit. 
3.Query sentence:-It's not used quite as much because the NEMA 0183 tends to be a one-talker-and-lots-of-listeners type of thing. But a query sentence allows a talker
to basically identify a listener and ask for a particular sentence. 
For example, $CCGPQ, GLL<CR><LF>that last Q tells us that it's a query sentence, and basically a computer is asking the GPS for the GLL sentence code.

IP cameras:-
An IP camera stands for Internet Protocol Camera, which is basically a digital video camera that transmits video footage over a network or the Internet. The basic 
difference between normal analog CCTV cameras and IP cameras is that IP cameras don't require a dedicated recording device like a DVR. That is, they can send and 
receive data directly to a network video recorder or even the cloud storage.
It is pretty easy to put an IP camera system together. First, we choose the cameras we want. Then we select the cable length we need. And then we will choose an NVR
with PoE. Connect to the network cable. Then connect. The thing is simple. Once you've mounted our camera, connect it to the network cable. Then connect the cable to
the NVR's PoE port. Now it’s recording.
Some common protocols of IP are:-
1. RTSP (Real-Time Streaming Protocol)
	Purpose: Streaming live video/audio over IP networks.
	Use: Used by most IP cameras for real-time video feed.
2. ONVIF (Open Network Video Interface Forum)
	Purpose: Standard protocol for interoperability between IP-based security products.
	Use: Allows control, configuration, and stream access of IP cameras regardless of the manufacturer.
3. HTTP/HTTPS
	Purpose: Used for camera configuration and sometimes for video streaming (via MJPEG).
	Use:
	i.Access camera web interface.
	ii.Get snapshot images or MJPEG streams.
4. RTMP (Real-Time Messaging Protocol)
	Purpose: Used for streaming to platforms like YouTube or Facebook.
	Use: Less common for IP cameras directly, but used when paired with streaming servers (like NGINX RTMP).
5. FTP/SFTP
	Purpose: For sending motion-detected images or videos to a remote server.
	Use: Cameras upload images/video clips when motion is detected.
6. SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol)
	Purpose: Email alerts.
	Use: Send motion detection images or logs to email addresses.
7. DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol)
	Purpose: Assign IP addresses dynamically to the camera.
	Use: Automatically provides camera with IP, gateway, DNS, etc.
8. NTP (Network Time Protocol)
	Purpose: Synchronize the camera clock with a time server.
	Use: Ensures timestamp accuracy for recorded footage.


Baud Rate:-
The baud rate is the rate at which information is transferred in a communication channel. Baud rate is commonly used when discussing electronics that use serial 
communication. In the serial port context, "9600 baud" means that the serial port is capable of transferring a maximum of 9600 bits per second.
At baud rates above 76,800, the cable length will need to be reduced. The higher the baud rate, the more sensitive the cable becomes to the quality of installation,
due to how much of the wire is untwisted around each device.

Communication Protocols:-
The proper descriptions of digital message formats as well as rules are known communication protocols. The main function of these protocols is to exchange messages 
from one computer system to another. These are significant in telecommunications systems as they consistently send and receive messages. These protocols cover error
detection & correction, signaling, and authentication. They can also explain the semantics, syntax & brings analog & digital communications together.
There are two types of communication protocols which are classified below:
Inter System Protocol
Intra System Protocol

Inter System Protocol
The inter-system protocol using to communicate the two different devices. Like communication between computer to microcontroller kit. The communication is done 
through an inter bus system,Inter Bus System Protocols.
Its types:-
UART Protocol
USART Protocol
USB Protocol

UART Protocol
UART stands for a universal asynchronous transmitter and receiver. 
UART Protocols is a serial communication with two wired protocols. The data cable signal lines are labeled as Rx and Tx. Serial communication is commonly used for 
transmitting and receiving the signal. It is transferred and receives the data serially bit by bit without class pulses. The UART takes bytes of data and sends the
individual bits in a sequential manner.
UART is a half-duplex protocol. (Half-duplex means transferring and receiving the data but not at the same time).Most of the controllers have hardware UART on board.
It uses a single data line for transmitting and receiving the data. It has one start bit, 8-bit data and a one-stop bit mean the 8-bit data transfer one’s signal is 
high to low.
Eg:-Emails, SMS, Walkie-talkie.

USART Protocol
USART stands for a universal synchronous and asynchronous transmitter and receiver. It is a serial communication of a two-wire protocol. The data cable signal lines
are labeled as Rx and TX. This protocol is used to transmitting and receiving the data byte by byte along with the clock pulses. It is a full-duplex protocol that 
means transmitting and receiving data simultaneously to different board rates. 
Eg:-Telecommunications

USB Protocol
USB stands for universal serial bus. Again it is a serial communication of two-wire protocol. The data cable signal lines are labeled D+ and D-. 
This protocol is used to communicate with the system peripherals.USB protocol is used to send and receive the data serially to the host and peripheral devices.
USB communication requires driver software that is based on the functionality of the system.USB devices can transfer data on the bus without any request on the host
computer.


Intra System Protocol
The Intra system protocol is used to communicate the two devices within the circuit board.The circuit complexity and power consumption will be increased by using 
the intrasystem protocol.
Its types:-
I2C Protocol
SPI Protocol
CAN Protocol

I2C Protocol
I2C stands for the inter-integrated circuit and it requires only two wires connecting all peripherals to the microcontroller. I2C requires two wires SDA 
(serial data line) and SCL (serial clock line) to carry information between devices. It is a master to a slave communication protocol. Each slave has a unique 
address. The master device sends the address of the target slave device and reads/writes the flag. The address matches any slave device that the device is ON,
the remaining slave devices are then on disabled mode.

SPI Protocol
SPI stands for the serial peripheral interface. 
It is one of the serial communication protocol.It requires four wires MOSI, MISO, SS, and SCLK.SPI protocol used to communicate the master and slave devices.
The master first configures the clock using a frequency.

CAN Protocol
CAN stands for the controller area network. It is a serial communication protocol. It requires two wires CAN High (H+) and CAN low (H-).
Modern vehicles have dozens of Electronic Control Units for engine, brakes, airbags, etc. Instead of running separate wires between each ECU, CAN allows them to 
communicate over a shared two-wire bus, reducing complexity and weight.

UDEV:-
Udev is the Linux subsystem that supplies your computer with device events.It's the code that detects when we have things plugged into our computer, like a network 
card, external hard drives, mouses, keyboards, joysticks and gamepads.It is  a potentially useful utility, and it's well-enough exposed that a standard user can
manually script it to do things like performing certain tasks when a certain hard drive is plugged in.






